Body


Should we worry about the ill effects of tiny matter? Vivienne Parry cuts nanotechnology down to size
The nation is to decide an extremely small matter next week. The Dana Centre in London, a national forum for discussing scientific issues, is asking the public to listen to expert evidence on the potential and dangers of nano-technology and to make a judgment that will be passed on to European decision-makers.
It's a timely question. As smoke poured from the Buncefield oil depot fire recently there were dire predictions about the health effects it might have, an issue that investigators are addressing. Of the many potentially toxic constituents of the huge grey cloud, nanoparticles were singled out for special concern. What if they were to enter our bodies? Yet a new report by the European Science Foundation has also emphasised the extraordinary potential of nanomedicine -the use of nanoparticles to treat disease. It has left most of us confused.
Should we be worried about nanoparticles or excited?
For a start, using the word "particle" isn't helpful, says Ken Donaldson, a professor of respiratory toxicology at the University of Edinburgh. "It's a bit like using the word drink when the drink might be milk or whisky."
Take three examples: a nanoparticle could be a bit of carbon in the exhaust gases of a lorry, but it might also be an antibody, which helps your body to fight infection, or an allergen that makes you sneeze.
What is nanomedicine?
Nano is the science of the teeny-tiny. The word comes from the Greek word nanos, meaning dwarf, and the so-called nanoscale covers things that are between 1 and 100 nanometres in size. A nanometre (nm) is a billionth of metre. By comparison, a human hair is 80,000nm wide, DNA is about 2nm wide, whereas individual atoms are less than a nanometre. "A nanoparticle to your body is on the same scale as a tennis ball to the moon," says Ruth Dunca,n of the University of Cardiff.
Each of the trillions of cells in your body is a processing plant, turning out nanosize particles. Medicine already exploits these. For instance, Herceptin, the breast cancer drug, is a nanosized antibody that has an exquisite ability to latch on to the HER2 receptors of tumour cells and stop them receiving the signals that tell them to grow.
Benefits
The term nanomedicine tends to be reserved for nano-conglomerates, clusters of particles that incorporate a medicine and a tiny detecting unit designed to seek out a specific target; or a cluster that includes a particle with a carrying unit and a treatment bit. This has meant that potent drugs normally too toxic for human beings can be used to treat cancers because they can be targeted so specifically.
The first nanomedicine of this sort was the anti-leukaemia drug Mylotarg. Many more are either on the market or completing clinical trials.
Miniature drug-delivery systems that have been developed include: "stealth liposomes", which are nano-sized fatty balls; many-branched devices that look like tumbleweeds (more properly called dendrimers); and "buckyballs", a hollow spherical form of carbon (see picture right) that can be filled with a medicine.
Buckyballs are also being considered as agents to deliver materials to organs that will make them show up more sharply in MRI scans.
There are two other burgeoning areas of nanomedicine. One is diagnostics. It is now possible to measure the workings of hundreds of genes at the same time on a tiny chip. And, on a more homely level, for your GP to use a low-cost "lab on a strip" to do several tests at the same time on the same spot of blood, which would normally involve sending many samples off to a laboratory.
The other area is in tissue engineering, where nanomaterials are being developed for reconstruction after trauma or illness. What there won't be is nanobots patrolling your bloodstream, but there are plans -the field is called theranostics, a combination of therapeutics and diagnostics -for nanosized bio-responsive systems which can diagnose and then deliver drugs or prompt tissue repair.
Possible risks
This all sounds marvellous, so where's the health problem? Potentially, there are several. The first is the very nature of nanoparticles. Even in the Middle Ages, it was known that size mattered. Depending on how fine the gold particles used in glass-making, the glass was either blue, red or gold. As the medieval glassmakers demonstrated so conclusively, the usual chemical and physical properties of elements can change completely with particle size, especially in the nanoscale, which means that what's already known about the effects of an element on the body may not hold true when it is present in tiny particles.
This knowledge gap is of greatest concern when considering the health and safety of those involved in the manufacture of nanoparticles, for whom there might be heavy accidental exposure. It is not known for example whether carbon nanotubes - which are just what they sound like -could join together, forming a fibre with similar effects to asbestos. The effects on the environment should there be a release are similarly unknown.
In a welcome piece of transparency, a recent report from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has identified these knowledge gaps, many of which are crucial to devising proper safety regulations. However, despite the smoke and mirrors in the report on funding for this work, the reality is that the Government has failed to allocate money for this vital research to the consternation of the Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering.
There is reassuring news, however. Human immune systems are configured to deal with nanoparticles as many of the viruses and allergens that we inhale and eat every day are tiny. And, as Anthony Seaton, a professor emeritus at Aberdeen University says: "Humans have been exposed to nanoparticles since they first started lighting fires." Nanoparticles are found in combustion products from fires and engines. City dwellers habitually breathe in millions, if not billions, each day as they walk around busy streets. "Unless nanoparticles are substantially more dangerous than these, surely there can't be that big a problem?" says Ken Donaldson.
Another concern is about location, when particles are found where they shouldn't be. They can be safe in one place in the body, but not in another. "It's rather like water being OK in your body but not being all right if it turns up in your lungs when you have pneumonia," Ruth Duncan says.
There have been reports of inhaled nanoparticles reaching the brain in animal studies, although this work has not been replicated. Some animal work has shown that inhaled carbon nanotubes can cause serious lung damage. There is also evidence that carbon nanoparticles are capable of causing greater inflammation in the lungs than larger-sized particles. And there is a suspicion, not proven, that the heart attacks associated with the great smogs of London were a nanoparticle effect. The suggestion is that they altered blood clotting, although no one is sure of the mechanism. Many scientists point out that manufactured nanoparticles are "clean", whereas those found in atmospheric pollution are dirty, carrying heavy metals and so forth that make them more reactive and thus potentially more dangerous to health.
We live with nanoparticles daily and always have done. But the fact that we do so should not blind us to the potential for harm from nanoparticles that are new to us, which need to be subjected to full safety reviews before use. Meanwhile, nanomedicine offers a future of more effective drugs, diagnostics and tissue repair. The future is tiny.
NANOMEDICINE IN ACTION
Ovarian cancer
Many nanomedicinesinvolve the use of liposomes: hollow spheres of fat that can enclose medicines. The fatty layer contains the drug until it comes into contact with the outer membrane of a target cell and then dissolves. The ovarian cancer drug Doxil uses this technique to deliver chemotherapy drugs accurately.
Breast cancer
The breast cancer drug Abraxane, which has recently been approved in America, is actually the existing anti-cancer drug Taxol re-engineered into a nanoparticle. This hitches a ride on the protein albumin, which is already in the body, and allows the drug to cross blood-vessel walls to the cancer.
Radiotherapy
Nanogenerators are now under development. These are nanoparticles that generate radioactivity and then go directly to cancerous tissue. This gives small doses of radiotherapy exactly where it is required, reducing side effects.

Load-Date: February 27, 2006
