Body


Michael Horton, a biochemist, medical doctor and research scientist, was a world-leading expert in bone research and a pioneer in the new discipline of nanomedicine, the medical application of nanotechnology.
Horton's long and distinguished research career involved the understanding of disease on the cellular and molecular levels, and led, in particular, to new methods of diagnosing and treating osteoporosis, a disease which reduces bone mineral density. He received international recognition for identifying, for the first time, a novel pathway by which degraded bone proteins are removed from the skeleton.
He co-founded the London Centre for Nanotechnology (LCN), an interdisciplinary joint effort between University College London (UCL) and Imperial College London, and successfully led it as the first director for life sciences.
He was also the head of the Sackler Institute of Musculo-Skeletal Research in the Department of Medicine at UCL and a co-director of the Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration (IRC) in nanotechnology run by the University of Bristol, the University of Cambridge and UCL.
Michael Anthony Horton was born in 1948 in the City of London and was educated at Oundle School. He studied biochemistry at the University of London, receiving his bachelor's degree in 1969 with first-class honours. He then studied medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital Medical College, London, qualifying in 1972.
He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1975 and was made a Fellow of the College in 1997. In 1987 he qualified as a member of the Royal College of Pathologists and in 1992 became a Fellow of the college. In 1973-76 he held training posts in medicine and pathology. In 1977-79 he worked as a research assistant in the Department of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy at UCL and was a lecturer in haematology at Barts.
From 1980 to 1994 he was senior lecturer in haematology and honorary consultant haematologist at Barts. In 1983 he took a year's sabbatical leave from Barts and undertook fundamental research in molecular biology at the medical research laboratories at Cambridge, Genentech (a biotechnology corporation in San Francisco) and the Meikai University, Japan.
When Horton returned to Barts in 1984 he was appointed principal scientist and head of the Haemopoiesis Research Group of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (now Cancer Research UK), a position he held until 1994.
In 1995 he became professor and head of the Bone and Mineral Centre, Department of Medicine, UCL and research director of the Sackler Institute of Musculo-Skeletal Research.
In 2001 he was appointed director of Life Sciences at the LCN. He retired in 2008 as Emeritus Professor and went to live in Northumberland to pursue his passion for gardening.
Horton enthusiastically fostered and led an interdisciplinary environment where young scientists could flourish. He was able to work across and beyond traditional boundaries with chemists, engineers and physicists.
He was widely admired as a gifted experimentalist, a superb critical as well as lateral thinker and as a friend to many colleagues.
Horton is survived by his wife, and a son and a daughter.
Professor Michael Horton, biochemist and medical research scientist, was born on May 6, 1948. He died of cancer on April 11, 2010, aged 61
Michael Horton He was an enthusiastic leader in an interdisciplinary research environment

Load-Date: May 7, 2010
