Body


Nanotechnology is the key technology for the future, tipped to bring extraordinary advances in medicine as well as innovations in fields from cosmetics to computers.
It is hoped that manipulating matter at the molecular and atomic level will result in higher crop yields, benefits to water purification, the production of spray-on solar panels and result in more durable products.
In the UK, nanotechnology is a growing field for post-graduate study.
At the London Centre for Nanotechnology, researchers from University College London and Imperial College London try to solve global problems in information processing, health care, energy and the environment.The centre calls on skills from the departments of chemistry, physics and medicine as well as a whole range of engineering expertise.
UCL offers an MSc in nanotechnology and regenerative medicine that equips students to understand the potential to revolutionise medicine. It includes an introduction to tissue engineering - the replacement or restoration of damaged tissues.
Many of the most extravagant claims for nanotechnology sound more like science fiction than science. For example, nanorobots could be programmed to perform delicate surgery, operating without leaving scars. They might be able to change physical appearance by rearranging atoms to remove that lump on your nose or turn your eye colour from muddy blue to a delightful violet.
Professor Sir Mark Welland, the head of the Nanoscience Centre at Cambridge University, looks to the future when he says: "Imagine a small implant, equivalent to a mobile phone, that communicates directly with your brain, as the internet does currently with the rest of the world. If I want to think a connection with my son who is walking in the Himalayas, I can think the connection and, just as your mobile phone does, it would dial up the device inside my son and I would talk to him, see him, feel his emotions and we would be infinitely connected to each other."
Some ideas about the future benefits of nanotechnology seem as incredible as the warnings that manipulation of the infinitely small nanoworld could lead mankind to its doom. In Michael Crichton's novel Prey, swarms of nanorobots reproduce and evolve, killing animals and taking over the bodies of the human researchers. More seriously, the Prince of Wales has warned of the need to use the technology wisely.
However, Professor Steve Wilks, co-director of the Centre for Nano-Health at Swansea University, says that he does not believe that there are dangers in nanotechnology.
At Swansea the MSc, based on nanomedicine, is run jointly by the engineering department and the medical school. Wilks says: "It's ironic that the smaller the technology the greater the cost of equipment. But a microscope that used to cost £150,000 is now £10,000 to £20,000, which means that pharmaceutical companies and others can afford them. Here at Swansea we are creating the workforce to allow nanotechnology to be used in many different fields.
"We are looking at how the fundamentals of nanotechnology can be applied to improve health care, maybe by replacing a room full of medical equipment with mini sensors the size of thumbnails."
The professor expects to see advances in diagnostics, citing the case of people who take the anticoagulant drug warfarin. "They go to hospital once a month to have their blood checked and dosage varied. Nanotechnology would allow them to monitor their dosage at home each day. You could have a mini diagnostic system combined with drug delivery.
He also looks forward to using nanoparticles to go around the body looking for cancer markers, allowing drugs to be targeted at secondary cancer tumours.

Graphic

 
Alex Seifalian, Professor of Nanotechnology and Regenerative Medicine at University College London, with a trachea created by his team
REX FEATURES

Load-Date: May 2, 2012
