Body


Diabetics could ditch their needles in favour of absorbing insulin through their cheeks under technology being developed by a biotechnology company aiming to raise £30 million in a flotation.
The Oxfordshire-based Midatech, which is chaired by Rolf Stahel, a former boss of Shire Pharmaceuticals, is testing a method of delivering insulin on tiny gold particles formed into a postage stamp-sized strip, which dissolves on the inside of the cheek. Midatech hopes to take advantage of a resurgent appetite for medical research companies in the City to join the Alternative Investment Market, with a valuation of between £42 million and £52 million, and to buy Q Chip, a rival research company.
Jim Phillips, the chief executive, said that successful floats of Circassia, which develops allergy medicines, and Horizon Discovery, a gene-editing business, had shown that investors were ready to buy stock in experimental drugs companies, after years of scepticism from institutions.
"While there have been some wobbles over the last couple of months, there's been a plainly open window for biotech in Europe this year," Dr Phillips said. Midatech is backed by Ippon Capital, a Swiss private equity company. It specialises in "nanomedicine", which is the delivery of drugs into the body by way of microscopic particles. Midatech's approach is to attach drugs, which are often unstable on their own, to tiny particles of gold, a metal that is inert and non-toxic.
The company's lead product is in diabetes, but Dr Phillips wants to concentrate on cancer. He said: "We're planning to aggressively push ourselves forward to become a speciality pharmaceuticals company focused on cancer over the next three to four years."
Midatech was founded by Thomas Rademacher, a scientist at University College London. Its core technology, however, was developed at a scientific institute in Seville. Panmure Gordon is taking the company to the market.

Graphic

 
Jim Phillips: "open window for biotech"

Load-Date: November 20, 2014
